\cond NEVER
Distributed under the MIT License.
See LICENSE.txt for details.
\endcond
# Visualisation Connectivity {#visualisation_connectivity}

\tableofcontents

This guide is split into two parts. The first part details what is meant by
'connectivity' and how it is used to visualise SpECTRE simulations in standard
visualisation software such as Paraview. The second part details the
methodology associated with ExtendConnectivity - a post-processing executable
that removes gaps in the default visualisations produced by SpECTRE.

# What is Connectivity?

SpECTRE simulations are built on a computational grid composed of individual
gridpoints. The 'connectivity' is a list added in the output simulation files
that instructs visualisation software, namely Paraview, on how to connect these
gridpoints to create lines/surfaces/volumes (depending on the dimension of the
simulation) as needed. Given these instructions, Paraview interpolates the data
over the regions between gridpoints to create line/surface/volume meshes.

In general, the connectivity list contains gridpoints in a particular sequence
that corresponds to a line/surface/volume mesh in Paraview. These gridpoints are
labelled with integers that are based on the order in which they appear in the
h5 files output by the simulation. As one might expect, this list is structured
differently depending on the dimension of the simulation. The key underlying
difference is the size of the smallest connected region. In 1D, our domain is
composed of lines so the smallest connected region is a line made up by two
points. In 2D, the smallest connected region used by SpECTRE is typically a
quadrilateral made up by four points. In 3D, the smallest connected region used
by SpECTRE is typically a hexahedron made up by eight points. A visual
representation is illusutrated below. (Note: The numbering of points has been
chosen arbitrarily. In reality, this numbering is determined based on the order
of gridpoints in the h5 file(s)).

\image html ConnectivityStructure.png "Basic connectivity in 1D, 2D, and 3D"

The figure above shows how connectivity is defined for a region in each
dimension. Fig (a) shows the gridpoint structure for these regions and Fig (c)
shows how the resulting mesh appears. Fig (b) shows how a connectivity list
should be sequenced to create the desired mesh. Then, in 1D, our connectivity
list to create the line in (c) would be [1,2]. Similarly, in 2D, our
connectivity list would be [1,2,4,3] and in 3D, our list would be
[1,2,4,3,5,6,8,7]. (Note that this sequencing is dictated by Paraview's
conventions, not SpECTRE's.)

The above example illustrates how to connect the smallest connected region in
each dimension. The complete connectivity list, detailing how the entire domain
mesh is to be created, is made by concatenating individual connectivity lists.
Thus, in 1D, Paraview interprets the list [1,2,2,3] in blocks of 2, with the
first block [1,2] representing a line between gridpoints 1 and 2, and the second
block [2,3] representing a line between gridpoints 2 and 3. This works similarly
in the other dimensions.

# How does ExtendConnectivity work?

ExtendConnectivity is a post-processing algorithm that looks to add more
connectivity entries to fill up any gaps in visualisation. These gaps have
multiple sources, the largest of which is the fact that SpECTRE does not add
connectivity between elements (as defined in
\ref domain_concepts "Domain Concepts") by default. This is important in certain
simulations where the endpoints of the elements do not overlap (e.g simulations
using Gauss quadrature), resulting in gaps between elements in visualisations.
ExtendConnectivity looks to fix this problem specifically. **Note:** The
remainder of this guide assumes we are working with simulations whose elements
don't overlap.

## Neighbours

The key idea in understanding how ExtendConnectivity works is understanding
how neighbouring elements are categorised and dealt with. The next sections
explain the categories of 'face neighbour', 'edge neighbour', and 'corner
neighbour' in detail for 1D, 2D, and 3D.

### 3D

We shall start in 3D because the categories are most intuitively defined in
3D. The image below shows a typical example of SpECTRE connectivity for a 3D
volume element (with h-refinement 1 and p-refinement 2 in each direction),
coloured by their neighbour categorisation.

\image html DefaultConnectivity3D.png "3D domain with default connectivity"

In the above image, the grey cube is our reference element that neighbour
elements are defined around. Then, we define any element that, if elements
overlapped, would share a face with our reference element to be a 'face
neighbour'. By this definition, we can see that our blue cubes in the above
image are our face neighbours. The definitions of the other categories are
analogous. We define any element that, if elements overlapped, would
share an edge to be an 'edge neighbour' and any element that would share a
corner to be a 'corner neighbour'. Hence, our red cubes are our edge neighbours
and our green cube is our corner neighbour. In general, for a 3D simulation,
face neighbours share a 2D region, edge neighbours share a 1D region, and corner
neighbours share a 0D region.

These categories apply to the element as a whole. Then, after the element is
categorised, the gridpoints must be filtered to the particular face, edge, or
corner that will be connected with our reference element. Note that edge and
corner neighbours require gridpoints from multiple neighbours (e.g. edge
neighbours involve connecting four edges - one from the reference element, two
from face neighbours, and one from the edge neighbour). Once the correct
gridpoints are identified, they are connected as described in the previous
section. The neighbour direction in particular determines the ordering of the
gridpoints in this sequence. The image below shows the same domain after the
missing connectivity has been added, coloured by the type of connectivity added.

\image html ExtendedConnectivity3D.png "3D domain with extended connectivity"

In this image, the brown cubes are the face neighbour connections, the orange
cubes are the edge neighbour connections, and the yellow cube is the corner
neighbour connection. The entire process is then repeated for the next element.

This example required only one connectivity entry to be added per neighbour
since each element was made up of just one cube. At larger p-refinements, an
element consists of more cubes and consequently, more connectivity entries are
required. For example, if the domain above had a p-refinement of 3 in each
dimension instead, face connections would require adding four cubes
and edge connections would require two cubes.

### 2D

We can now generalise these definitions to other dimensions. The image below
shows a typical example of SpECTRE connectivity for a 2D volume element (with
h-refinement 1 and p-refinement 2 in each direction), coloured by their
neighbour categorisation in the same colours as above.

\image html ExtendedConnectivity2D.png "2D domain with extended connectivity"

Once again, the grey square is our reference element. We now define our
neighbour types to be analogous to the types in 3D but reduced by one dimension.
Then, in a 2D simulation, face neighbours share a 1D regions, edge neighbours
share a 0D region, and corner neighbours do not exist. In the image above, our
face neighbours are once again blue and our edge neighbours are once again red.

Once the elements are categorised, the relevant gridpoints are once again
filtered and connected according to the 2D structure explained above. In the
image, the face connections are coloured brown and the edge connections are
coloured orange again. The next element is then made the reference element and
the process is repeated to build up the connectivity for the entire domain.

### 1D

We display the concepts in 1D for completeness. The image below shows an example
of SpECTRE connectivity for a 1D volume element (with h-refinement 1 and
p-refinement 2), coloured by their neighbour categorisation in the same colours
as above.

\image html ExtendedConnectivity1D.png "1D domain with extended connectivity"

In this image, the grey line is our reference element. In a 1D simulation, we
correspondingly define face neighbours to share a 0D region and both edge and
corner neighbours do not exist. Then, in the image above, our face neighbour
is once again the blue element and the face connection is coloured brown again.

### Summary

* Face Neighbour:<br>
  A neighbouring element that shares an overlap region one dimension lower than
  the dimension of the simulation.

* Edge Neighbour:<br>
  A neighbouring element that shares an overlap region two dimensions lower than
  the dimension of the simulation.

* Corner Neighbour:<br>
  A neighbouring element that shares an overlap region three dimensions lower
  than the dimension of the simulation.


## Connecting elements with different p-refinements

To be added.